README.md, before:

<p align="center">
    <a href="https://github.com/Living-with-machines/DeezyMatch/blob/master/LICENSE">
        <img alt="License" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg">
    </a>
    <br/>
</p>



# Word embedding playground
Code created during KB Research in Residence project "Why girls smile and boys don't cry.". This repository provides tools for training and fine-tuning word embeddings (Word2Vec and FastText) on a selected subset of Dutch Newspapers available in Delpher. It also provides tools for exploring diachronic embeddings along the dimension of political leaning and place.

The code in this repository allows you to train word embedding models, explore their content and analyse bias. The main README focusses in training word embedding models, but to read more about the interactive **lexicon expansion** go [here](./code/LexiconExpansion/README.md), the code for **analysing bias** is explained [here](.code/Bias/README.md).



## Training

These scripts provide function for training Word2Vec and FastText models, either individually or in batch. The first step requires proprecessing the zipped newspaper data, which is handled by the `prep_sentences_batch.py` script.

Before running the script adjust the hyperparameters listed below.


```python
ROOT = "/path/to/zip/files"
SENT_OUTPUT = "path/to/output/folder"

START_YEAR = 1850
END_YEAR = 1910

WORKERS = 8 # the number of cores used for preprocessing the data
```

Then run

```bash
python prep_sentences_batch.py
```

This will produce one large `.txt` file for each year, with one (processed) newspaper article per line. For inspecting, the exact procedure for processing the text files, please consult the `preprocess_sent` function in `utils_train.py`.

After preprocessing data, you can train a batch of embedding models on the newspapers. Below we show how to train Word2Vec models in batch, but the same procedure applies to creating FastText models. 

`train_word2vec_batch.py` is the main workhorse. Before running it, adjust the hyperparamters listed below. The `METADATA_PATH` refers to excel file in the `resources` folder, which provides information on the political leaning, publication and circulation of newspapers.

```python
# paths
ROOT = "/path/to/root/folder" # 
SENT_OUTPUT = "/path/to/processed/data"
METADATA_PATH = "../../resources/Lijst_kranten_final.xlsx"
```

Next, define the model hyperparameters. More information can be found in the [gensim documentation](https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/models/word2vec.html).

```python
# model hyperparameter
SIZE = 300 # size of word vector
WINDOW = 20 # window size 
MIN_COUNT = 10 # remove words that appear less than n time
WORKERS = 8 # use n number of cores
EPOCH = 4 # train for n epochs
SEED = 42
```


After setting the model hyperparameters, define the training routine, which moves as a sliding window over a selected date range..
The first step entials setting a time range, i.e. the period for which to generate Word2Vec models. `TRAIN_START` and `TRAIN_END` are the first and last year. `TRAIN_WINDOW` refers to number of years included in each step, `TRAIN_STEP` sets the step size. For the parameters selected below, the train routine will start at 1840, train a model for the period 1840-1860, and then move the window with five years to 1845-1865 etc.

```python
# training data hyperparameters
TRAIN_START = 1840
TRAIN_END = 1909
TRAIN_STEP = 5
TRAIN_WINDOW = 20
```

The last hyperparamater is `FACETS`. This allows you to add another dimension to the training routine (besides time). These facets refer to colums in the metadata file, and you can easily change the cell values, or simply add another column, depending on your research question. The standard options are: 

- Politek: Political leaning of the newspaper;
- Verspreidingsgebied: Indicates whether this is a national or regional newspaper;
- Provincie: The province in which the newspaper is published.



## Exploring word embedings

Code for exploring vector spaces. See the lexicon expansion [README](https://github.com/kasparvonbeelen/WordEmbeddingPlayground/tree/master/code/LexiconExpansion/README.md) for more information.

## Bias 

Inspect bias over different Word2Vec model. See the bias [README](https://github.com/kasparvonbeelen/WordEmbeddingPlayground/tree/master/code/Bias/README.md) for more information.

Commit message:

update structure of the main readme

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
    <a href="https://github.com/Living-with-machines/DeezyMatch/blob/master/LICENSE">
        <img alt="License" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg">
    </a>
    <br/>
</p>



# Word embedding playground

Code created during KB Research in Residence project "Why girls smile and boys don't cry". This repository provides tools for **training and fine-tuning word embedding models** (Word2Vec and FastText) on a selected subset of Dutch Newspapers available in Delpher. 

It also comes with various functions to explore the trained embeddings. **Lexicon expansion**, allows you to "travel through a vector space" and interactively create a lexicon of conceptually related words in the process. In the **Bias** folder, you find various tools for analysing bias over time and other dimensions such as political leaning and place.

[Training WEM Models](#training-models)
[Lexicon Expansion](#explore-word-embedings)
[Analyse bias](#analyse-bias)



## Training models

These scripts provide function for training Word2Vec and FastText models, either individually or in batch. The first step requires proprecessing the zipped newspaper data, which is handled by the `prep_sentences_batch.py` script.

Before running the script adjust the hyperparameters listed below.


```python
ROOT = "/path/to/zip/files"
SENT_OUTPUT = "path/to/output/folder"

START_YEAR = 1850
END_YEAR = 1910

WORKERS = 8 # the number of cores used for preprocessing the data
```

Then run

```bash
python prep_sentences_batch.py
```

This will produce one large `.txt` file for each year, with one (processed) newspaper article per line. For inspecting, the exact procedure for processing the text files, please consult the `preprocess_sent` function in `utils_train.py`.

After preprocessing data, you can train a batch of embedding models on the newspapers. Below we show how to train Word2Vec models in batch, but the same procedure applies to creating FastText models. 

`train_word2vec_batch.py` is the main workhorse. Before running it, adjust the hyperparamters listed below. The `METADATA_PATH` refers to excel file in the `resources` folder, which provides information on the political leaning, publication and circulation of newspapers.

```python
# paths
ROOT = "/path/to/root/folder" # 
SENT_OUTPUT = "/path/to/processed/data"
METADATA_PATH = "../../resources/Lijst_kranten_final.xlsx"
```

Next, define the model hyperparameters. More information can be found in the [gensim documentation](https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/models/word2vec.html).

```python
# model hyperparameter
SIZE = 300 # size of word vector
WINDOW = 20 # window size 
MIN_COUNT = 10 # remove words that appear less than n time
WORKERS = 8 # use n number of cores
EPOCH = 4 # train for n epochs
SEED = 42
```


After setting the model hyperparameters, define the training routine, which moves as a sliding window over a selected date range..
The first step entials setting a time range, i.e. the period for which to generate Word2Vec models. `TRAIN_START` and `TRAIN_END` are the first and last year. `TRAIN_WINDOW` refers to number of years included in each step, `TRAIN_STEP` sets the step size. For the parameters selected below, the train routine will start at 1840, train a model for the period 1840-1860, and then move the window with five years to 1845-1865 etc.

```python
# training data hyperparameters
TRAIN_START = 1840
TRAIN_END = 1909
TRAIN_STEP = 5
TRAIN_WINDOW = 20
```

The last hyperparamater is `FACETS`. This allows you to add another dimension to the training routine (besides time). These facets refer to colums in the metadata file, and you can easily change the cell values, or simply add another column, depending on your research question. The standard options are: 

- Politek: Political leaning of the newspaper;
- Verspreidingsgebied: Indicates whether this is a national or regional newspaper;
- Provincie: The province in which the newspaper is published.



## Explore word embedings

To read more about the interactive **lexicon expansion** go [here](./code/LexiconExpansion/README.md) for more information.


## Analyse bias 

Inspect bias over different Word2Vec model. See the bias [README](./code/Bias/README.md) for more information.
